##Title
Mass bends light – the first detection of a black hole through gravitational lensing

##Abstract
Astronomical observations have shown that black holes exist at two different mass scales – stellar-mass black holes formed from the collapse of dying stars, and so-called _supermassive_ black holes fed by the accretion of gas into the central regions of galaxies. While theoretical mechanisms for the formation of black holes at intermediate mass scales have been proposed, the empirical evidence for such objects has remained scant. However, the potential of exploiting effects due to gravitational lensing – the bending of light by strong gravitational fields – to hunt these objects down has so far been largely unexplored.
Gravitational lensing has already allowed astronomers to find planets outside our solar systems, to estimate the masses of galaxies and probe the dark matter of the Universe. We have singled out a case of such systems compatible with our simulations of gravitationally lensed radio jets and were granted 12 hours of time with the global VLBI array to test our hypothesis. Previous VLBA maps of the gravitationally-lensed quasar in B1152+199 have resulted in a tentative detection of a dark compact substructure in the main lens with mass 1e5-1e7 Msolar, based on the jet curvature seen in one of the two macroimages in this system. We are now in posession of a new set of 3.6 cm observations of the system B1152+199, using the global VLBI array, providing ~4 times better resolution (0.7 mas) than the 6 cm VLBA data to A) confirm the jet curvature and B) search for previously unresolved distortions in the curved jet to provide the first robust detection of gravitational millilensing by dark halo substructure. Our numerical models suggest that if the peculiar appearance of this radio source is indeed due to gravitational lensing by a foreground object, then that object must have properties very similar to an intermediate-mass black hole. If confirmed, this would not only be the smallest gravitational lens ever discovered, but also the first case of a black hole discovered through gravitational lensing, at any mass scale.
